This is a LibriVox recording.
All LibriVox recordings are in the public domain.
For more information or to volunteer, please visit LibriVox.org.
21 A New Departure in Flavorings Dear me, there is nothing but meetings and
this world, as Mrs. Lynde says, remarked Anne plainly, putting her slate and books down
in the kitchen table on the last day of June, and wiping her red eyes with a very damp handkerchief.
Wasn't it fortunate, Marilla, that I took an extra handkerchief to school today?
I had a pre-sentiment that it would be needed.
I never thought you were so fond of Mr. Phillips that you'd require two handkerchiefs that dry
your tears just because he was going away, said Marilla.
I don't think I was crying because I was really so very fond of him, reflected Anne.
I just cried because all the others did.
It was Ruby Gillis started it.
Ruby Gillis had always declared that she hated Mr. Phillips, but as soon as he got up to
make his farewell speech, she burst into tears.
Then all the other girls began to cry.
One after the other.
I tried to hold out, Marilla.
I tried to remember the time Mr. Phillips made me sit with a boy, and the time he spelled
my name without her knee on the blackboard, and how he said I was the worst dance he ever
saw at geometry, and laughed at my spelling, and all the times he'd been so horrid and
sarcastic, but somehow I couldn't, Marilla, and I just had to cry, too.
Jane Williams has been talking for her mother about how glad she'd be when Mr. Phillips
went away, and she declared she'd never shed a tear while she was worse than any of us
and had to borrow a handkerchief from her brother.
Of course the boys didn't cry because she hadn't brought one of her own, not expecting
to need it.
Oh, Marilla, it was heart-rending.
Mr. Phillips made such a beautiful farewell speech, beginning the time has come for us
to part.
It was very affecting.
And he had tears in his eyes, too, Marilla.
Oh, I felt dreadfully sorry and remorseful for all the times I'd talked in school and
draw pictures of him on my slate and made fun of him and Prissy.
I can tell you I wished I'd been a model pupil like Minnie Andrews.
She hadn't anything on her conscience.
The girls cried all the way home from school.
Carrie Sloan kept saying every few minutes, the time has come for us to part, and that
would start us off again whenever we were in any danger of cheering up.
I do feel dreadfully sad, Marilla, but one can't quite feel in the depths of despair
with two months' vacation before them, can they, Marilla?
And besides, we met the new minister and his wife coming from the station.
For all I was feeling so bad about Mr. Phillips going away, I couldn't help taking a little
interest in the new minister, could I?
His wife is very pretty.
Not exactly wiggly-lovely, of course.
It wouldn't do, I suppose, for a minister to have a wiggly-lovely wife because she might
set a bad example.
Mrs. Lynn says the minister's wife over at Newbridge sets a very bad example because
she dresses so fashionably.
Our new minister's wife was dressed in blue muslin with lovely puff sleeves and a hat
shim with roses.
Jane Andrews said she thought puff sleeves were too whirly for a minister's wife, but
I didn't make any such uncharitable remark, Marilla, because I know what is too long for
puff sleeves.
Besides, she's only been a minister's wife for a little while, so one should make allowances,
shouldn't they?
They are going to bore with Mrs. Lynn until the manse is ready.
If Marilla, in going down to Mrs. Lynn's that evening, was actuated by any motive save her
avowed one of returning the quilting-frames she had borrowed the preceding winter, it
was an amiable weakness shared by most of the Avonlea people.
Many a thing Mrs. Lynn had lent, sometimes never expecting to see it again, came home
that night in charge of the borrowers thereof.
A new minister, and moreover a minister with a wife, was a lawful object of curiosity in
a quiet little country settlement where sensations were few and far between.
Old Mr. Bentley, the minister a woman had found lacking in imagination, had been pastor
of Avonlea for eighteen years.
He was a widower when he came, and a widower he remained, despite the fact that gossip
regularly married him to this, that, or the other one every year of his sojourn.
In the preceding February he had resigned his charge and departed amid the regrets of
these people, most of whom had the affection borne of long intercourse for their good old
minister in spite of his shortcomings as an orator.
Since then the Avonlea church had enjoyed a variety of religious dissipation in listening
to the many and various candidates and supplies who came Sunday after Sunday to preach on
trial.
These stood or fell by the judgment of the fathers and mothers in Israel, but a certain
small red-haired girl who sat meekly in the corner of the old Cuthbert pew also had her
opinions about them, and discussed the same in full with Matthew, Marilla always declining
from principle to criticize ministers in any shape or form.
I don't think Mr. Smith would have done, Matthew, was Anne's final summing up.
Mrs. Linses's delivery was so poor, but I think his worst fault was just like Mr. Bentley's.
He had no imagination, and Mr. Terry had too much.
He let her run away with him just as I did mine in the manor of the Haunted Wood.
Besides, Mrs. Linses's theology wasn't sound.
Mr. Grassland was a very good man and a very religious man, but he told too many funny
stories and made the people laugh in church.
He was undignified, and you must have some dignity about a minister, mustn't you, Matthew?
I thought Mr. Marshall was decidedly attractive, but Mrs. Linses, as he isn't married or even
engaged because she made special inquiries about him and she says it would never do to
have a young unmarried minister in Avonlea, because he might marry in the congregation
and that would make trouble.
Mrs. Linses is a very far-seeing woman, isn't she, Matthew?
I am very glad they have called Mr. Allen.
I like him because his sermon was interesting and he prayed as if he meant it, and not just
if he did it because he was in the habit of it.
Mrs. Linses, he isn't perfect, but she says she supposes we couldn't expect a perfect
minister for $750 a year in any way, his theology is sound, because she questioned him thoroughly
at all points of doctrine.
And she knows his wife's people, and they are most respectable, and the women are all
good housekeepers.
Mrs. Linses, the sound doctrine in the man and the good housekeeping in the woman make
an ideal combination for a minister's family.
The new minister and his wife were a young, pleasant-faced couple, still on their honeymoon
and full of all good and beautiful enthusiasms for their chosen life work.
Avonlea opened its heart to them from the start.
Old and young, like the frank, cheerful young man with his high ideals and the bright, gentle
little lady who assumed the mistresship of the man's.
With Mrs. Allen, Anne fell promptly and wholeheartedly in love.
She had discovered another kindred spirit.
Mrs. Allen is perfectly lovely, she announced one Sunday afternoon.
She's taken her class, and she's a splendid teacher.
She said right away she didn't think it was fair for the teacher to ask all the questions.
And you know, Marilla, that is exactly what I've always thought.
She said we could ask her any question we liked, and I asked ever so many.
I'm good at asking questions, Marilla.
I believe you, was Marilla's emphatic comment.
Nobody else asked any except Ruby Gillis, and she asked if there was to be a Sunday
school picnic this summer.
I didn't think that was a very proper question to ask, because it hadn't any connection
with the lesson.
The lesson was about Daniel and the lion's den, but Mrs. Allen just smiled and said she
thought there would be.
Mrs. Allen has a lovely smile, she has such exquisite dimples in her cheeks.
I wish I had dimples in my cheeks, Marilla.
I'm not half as skinny as I was when I came here, but I have no dimples yet.
If I had, perhaps I could influence people for good.
Mrs. Allen said we ought to try to influence other people for good.
She talks so nice about everything.
I never knew before that religion was such a cheerful thing.
I always thought it was kind of melancholy, but Mrs. Allen's isn't, and I'd like to be
a Christian if I could be one like her.
I wouldn't want to be one like Mr. Superintendent Bell.
It's very naughty of you to speak so about Mr. Bell, said Marilla severely.
Mr. Bell is a real good man.
Oh, of course he's good, agreed Anne, but he doesn't seem to get any comfort out of
it.
If I could be good, I'd dance and sing all day because I was glad of it.
I suppose Mrs. Allen is too old to dance and sing, and of course it wouldn't be dignified
to administer his wife.
I can just feel she's glad she's a Christian and that she'd be one even if she could get
to heaven without it.
I suppose he must have missed her Mrs. Allen up to tea some day soon, said Marilla reflectively.
They've been most everywhere but here.
Let me see.
Next Wednesday'd be a good time to have them, but don't say a word to Matthew about it,
for if he knew they were coming he'd find some excuse to be away that day.
He got so used to Mr. Bentley he didn't mind him, but he's going to find it hard to get
acquainted with a new minister, and a new minister's wife will frighten him to death.
I'll be as secret as the dead, assured Anne, but oh, Marilla, will you let me make a cake
for the occasion?
I'd love to do something for Mrs. Allen, and you know I can make a pretty good cake by
this time.
You can make a lighter cake, promised Marilla.
Monday and Tuesday great preparations went on at Green Gables.
Having the minister and his wife to tea was a serious and important undertaking, and Marilla
was determined not to be eclipsed by any of the Avonlea housekeepers.
Anne was wild with excitement and delight.
She talked it all over with Diana Tuesday night in the twilight, as they sat on the
big red stones by the Dryad's Bubble, and made rainbows in the water with little twigs
dipped in fir balsam.
Everything is ready, Diana, except my cake, which I'm to make in the morning, and the
baking-powder biscuits which Marilla will make just before tea-time.
I assure you, Diana, that Marilla and I have had a busy two days of it.
It's such a responsibility, having a minister's family to tea.
I never went through such an experience before.
You should just see our pantry.
It's a sight to behold.
We're going to have jelly chicken and cold tongue.
We're to have two kinds of jelly—red and yellow and whipped cream and leaven pie and
cherry pie and three kinds of cookies and fruit cake and Marilla's famous yellow plum
that she keeps especially for ministers and pound cake and layer cake and biscuits, as
aforesaid, and new bread and old both in case the minister is dyspeptic and can't eat new.
Mrs. Lynn says ministers are dyspeptic, but I don't think Mr. Allen has been a minister
long enough for it to have a bad effect on him.
I just grow cold when I think of my layer cake.
Oh, Diana, what if it shouldn't be good?
I dreamed last night that I was chased all over by a fearful goblin with a big layer cake for a head.
It'll be good, all right, assured Diana, who was a very comfortable sort of friend.
I'm sure that piece of the one you made that we had for lunch a night a while two weeks ago
was perfectly elegant.
Yes, but cakes have such a terrible habit of turning out bad just when you especially
want them to be good, side-and, setting a particularly well-balsam twig afloat.
However, I suppose I shall just have to trust a providence and be careful to put in the flower.
Oh, look, Diana, what a lovely rainbow.
Do you suppose the dryad will come out after we go away and take it for a scarf?
You know there is no such thing as a dryad, said Diana.
Diana's mother had found out about the haunted wood and had been decidedly angry over it.
As a result, Diana had abstained from any further imitative flights of imagination
and did not think it prudent to cultivate a spirit of belief, even in harmless dryads.
But it's so easy to imagine there is, said Anne.
Every night before I go to bed I look out my window and wonder if the dryad is really sitting
there, combing her locks with the spring for a mirror. Sometimes I look for her
footprints in the dew in the morning. Oh, Diana, don't give up your faith in the dryad.
Wednesday morning came. Anne got up at sunrise because she was too excited to sleep.
She had caught a severe cold in the head by reason of her dabbling in the spring and the
preceding evening, but nothing short of absolute pneumonia could have quenched her interest in
culinary matters that morning. After breakfast she proceeded to make her cake. When she finally
shut the oven door upon it, she drew a long breath. I'm sure I haven't forgotten anything
this time, Marilla, but do you think it will rise? Just suppose perhaps the baking powder
isn't good. I used it out of the new can, and Mrs. Lynde says you can never be sure of getting
good baking powder nowadays when everything is so adulterated. Mrs. Lynde says the Government
ought to take the matter up, but she says we'll never see the day when the Tory Government will
do it. Marilla, what if the cake doesn't rise? We'll have plenty without it, was Marilla's
unimpassioned way of looking at the subject. The cake did rise, however, and came out of the oven
and feathery as golden foam. Anne, flushed with delight, clapped it together with layers of
ruby jelly, and, in imagination, saw Mrs. Allen eating it and possibly asking for another piece.
You'll be using the best tea set, of course, Marilla, she said. Can I fix the table with
wild roses? I think that's all nonsense, sniffed Marilla, in my opinion it's the eatables that
matter and not flummery decorations. Mrs. Barry had her table decorated, said Anne,
who was not entirely guiltless of the wisdom of the serpent, and the minister paid her an
elegant compliment. He said it was a feast for the eye as well as the palate.
Well, do as you like, said Marilla, who was quite determined not to be surpassed by Mrs. Barry or
anybody else. Only mind you need enough room for the dishes and food. Anne laid herself out to
decorate in a manner and after a fashion that would leave Mrs. Barry's nowhere. Having abundance
of roses and ferns and a very artistic taste of her own, she made that tea table such a thing of
that when the minister and his wife sat down to it they exclaimed in chorus over its loveliness.
It's Anne's doings, said Marilla, grimly just, and Anne felt that Mrs. Allen's approving smile
was almost too much happiness for this world. Matthew was there, having been unveiled into the
party only goodness and Anne knew how. He had been in such a state of shyness and nervousness that
Marilla had given him up in despair, but Anne took him in hand so successfully that he now sat
at the table in his best clothes and white collar and talked to the minister, not uninterestingly.
He never said a word to Mrs. Allen, but that perhaps was not to be expected.
All went merry as a marriage bell until Anne's layer cake was passed. Mrs. Allen, having already
been held to a bewildering variety, declined it, but Marilla, seeing the disappointment on Anne's
face, said smilingly, Oh, you must take a piece of this, Mrs. Allen. Anne made it on purpose for you.
In that case I must sample it, laughed Mrs. Allen, helping herself to a plump triangle,
as did also the minister and Marilla. Mrs. Allen took a mouthful of hers
and a most peculiar expression crossed her face. Not a word did she say, however,
but steadily ate away at it. Marilla saw the expression and hastened to taste the cake.
Anne, surely, she exclaimed, what on earth did you put into that cake?
Nothing but what the recipe said, Marilla, cried Anne with a look of anguish. Oh, isn't it all right?
All right, it's simply horrible. Mr. Allen, don't try to eat it. Anne, taste it yourself.
What flavoring did you use?
Vanilla, said Anne, her face scarlet with mortification after tasting the cake.
Holy vanilla! Oh, Marilla, it must have been the baking powder. I had my suspicions of that baking
powder fiddlesticks. Go and bring me the bottle of vanilla you used.
Anne fled to the pantry and returned with a small bottle, partially filled with a brown liquid,
and labeled yellowly, best vanilla. Marilla took it, uncorked it, smelled it.
Mercy on us, Anne! You flavored that cake with anodyne liniment. I broke the liniment bottle last
week and poured what was left into an old empty vanilla bottle. I suppose it's partly my fault,
I should have warned you. But for pity's sake, why couldn't you have smelled it?
Anne dissolved into tears under this double disgrace. I couldn't. I had such a cold.
And with this she fairly fled to the gabled chamber,
where she cast herself on the bed and wept as one who refuses to be comforted.
Presently a light step sounded on the stairs, and somebody entered the room.
Oh, Marilla! sobbed Anne, without looking up. I'm disgraced forever. I shall never be able
to live this down. It will get out. Things always do when Anne and Lee.
Tana will ask me how my cake turned out, and I shall have to tell her the truth.
I shall always be pointed at as the girl who flavored a cake with anodyne liniment.
The boys in school will never get over laughing at it.
Oh, Marilla, if you have a spark of Christian pity,
don't tell me that I must go down and wash the dishes after this.
I'll wash them when the minister and his wife are gone, but I cannot ever look at Mrs. Allen
in the face again. Perhaps she'll think I tried to poison her. Mrs. Linz says she knows an orphan
girl who tried to poison her, but the liniment isn't poisonous. It's meant to be taken eternally,
although not in cakes. Won't you tell Mrs. Allen so, Marilla?
Suppose you jump up and tell her so yourself, said a merry voice.
Anne flew up to find Mrs. Allen standing by her bed, surveying her with laughing eyes.
My dear little girl, you mustn't cry like this, she said, genuinely disturbed by Anne's tragic face.
Why, it's all just a funny mistake that anybody might make.
Oh, no, it takes me to make such a mistake, said Anne forlornly.
And I wanted to have that cake so nice for you, Mrs. Allen.
Yes, I know, dear, and I assure you I appreciate your kindness and thoughtfulness
just as much as if it had turned out all right. Now, you mustn't cry any more,
but come down with me and show me your flower garden.
Miss Cuthbert tells me you have a little plot all your own.
I want to see it, for I'm very much interested in flowers.
Anne permitted herself to be let down and comforted,
reflecting that it was really providential that Mrs. Allen was a kindred spirit.
Nothing more was said about the liniment cake.
And when the guests went away, Anne found that she'd enjoyed the evening more than she could
have expected, considering that terrible incident. Nevertheless, she sighed deeply.
Marilla, isn't it nice to think that tomorrow was a new day with no mistakes in it yet?
I'll warrant you'll make plenty in it, said Marilla.
I never saw your beat for making mistakes, Anne.
Yes, and well I know it, admitted Anne mournfully.
But have you ever noticed one encouraging thing about me, Marilla? I never make the same mistake twice.
I don't know if that's much benefit when you're always making new ones.
Oh, don't you see, Marilla? There must be a limit to the mistakes one person can make,
and when I get to the end of them, then I'll be through with them.
That's a very comforting thought.
Well, you'd better go and give that cake to the pigs, said Marilla.
It isn't fit for any human to eat, not even Jerry Boot.
Prince Edward Island